In this segment I'm going to
introduce phrase queries which
in practice have been the most important
kind of extended Boolean query.
And then examine how you need to extend
inverted index data structure to
be able to handle phrase queries.
So very often we'd like to query
not only for individual words but
also for multi-word units.
Many useful things that we want
to query on a multi-word units.
So information retrieval
is multi-word unit.
Well, many, many other things like
organization names Stanford University.
So, what we want to do is have
a mechanism where we can see, say,
let's match these pair of words as
a unit and the syntax that's standardly
used in modern web search engines is
to put it in inverted quotes like that.
And so
if we have that kind of phrase as a query,
then what we're going to say
is a document that says I went
to university at Stanford
doesn't match that phrase query.
So this notion of putting
things in inverted commas
has proven to be very
easily understood by users.
Something that information retrieval
system designers generally
lament is that when people design
advanced search functionality for
their systems that almost nobody uses it.
Just a few people like me and
academics and people like that, but
regular users just don't use it.
And really this notion of
phrase querying is sort of
the newest thing to an exception, that
it is fairly widely understood and used.
But I'll point out, that as well
as overt phrase queries like this,
there's actually another
interesting phenomenon
is that many of the queries
are implicit phrase queries.
So someone will give us their query
San Francisco or something like that.
And well, really what they want to do
is have it interpreted as a phrase,
but they just didn't bother or know to
put the inverted quotes around that.
So, in modern web search
engines an active area of
research has been how to identify these
implicit phrases and take advantage of
knowing it's an implicit phrase,
to alter what documents get returned.
But we're going to leave that aside for
the moment,
and we're just going to deal with these
explicit phrases, and work out how
we can do a good job at matching them
with our information retrieval system.
Okay, well first what should be clear
is that it no longer suffices to
store just a term and a posting's
list of documents for each term.
Because if we have only that,
we can easily find documents that contain
two terms but we have no idea whether
the terms are adjacent to each
other as a phrase in that document.
The only way we could do it is
by exhaustive post-processing of
candidate documents to see if they
actually did contain the phrase and that
would be extremely slow because we would
be back to linear scanning of documents.
One way to solve this problem
is the idea of a biword index.
So, for a biword index,
what we do is we index every
consecutive pair of terms as a phrase.
So for example if we have this text here,
Friends, Romans, Countrymen,
we generate the biwords of adjacent
words of friends and romans.
And then we generate the biword
of romans countrymen and
each of these biwords is
now a dictionary term.
And so what does that mean?
Well that means that for each of these we
would say that friends romans occurs in,
let's say this is document 17 and
maybe it also occurs in documents 33 and
romans countrymen occurs in document 17
and it might occur in some other document.
Well, if we build that,
two word phrase querying is now immediate,
because if we want to find
documents that contain friends,
romans in them, we can just look
up this dictionary entry and
then grab the postings list
that was returned for it.
If we consider more complex cases,
we can even basically handle those.
So we can handle longer phrase
queries by breaking them down.
So if our phrase query is
stanford university palo alto,
we can break it up into an AND
query of stanford university AND
university palo AND Palo Alto.
And so we can use our byword index to
find documents that contain
all three of these bigrams.
Now that's not going to be perfect.
Without doing a linear
scan through the docs,
we can't be sure that the documents
that we're returning actually have this
continuous phrase stanford
university palo alto.
But it seems highly likely that they will,
because we've checked that each
of these bigrams occurring.
So there's a small chance
of false positives, but
it seems like we're in
a pretty good state.
So one of the issues with
using a biword index, well,
as we noted before, there can be
false positives in what's returned.
But maybe that's not such a big problem.
The big problem is that there's
this enormous blow up of the index,
because our dictionary has
gotten much more massive.
So that means that it's not
practical to have triword and
quadword indices to actually
exactly match long queries.
But even for biwords we then potentially
have the space of words squared
of possible dictionary entries.
So because of that, biword indices
are not the standard solution for
handling free searching.
But as I'll show, it wasn't useless
that I explained them to you,
because as I'll show at the end, they can
be an important component of a solution.
So what is the standard solution?
The standard solution is to move
to having the positional index.
So the idea of the positional
index is that in the postings we
store not only the documents
that contain the term, but
also the position in each
document where the term appears.
So, the organization of what we
have now is in the dictionary.
We have a term.
And the document frequency of the term.
And then when we point off
to the postings lists,
then instead of just having
a list of document IDs.
We then have a list of
document IDs where for
each document we then have a list
of positions where the term occurs.
Let's look at that
concretely with an example.
So, here we have the word be, which
occurs in almost a million documents.
And then we have where.
So, in document 1,
it occurs at word 7, 18, 33, etc.
Document 2 it occurs in
these two word positions.
It doesn't occur in document three.
Document 4,
it occurs in a bunch of places, and so on.
And so with these, we can then be
able to check where the phrases
occur by then seeing where the words
occur adjacent to each other.
To get the idea of that, you could
consider this little question here.
So which of these four documents
could contain to be or
not to be based on those
document positions.
Now obviously we haven't seen the postings
list for the other words, but
just looking at where be occurs
which document is a candidate.
So with this kind of data structure,
we can handle phrase queries
using a merge algorithm
much as we showed before.
It's just a little bit hairier
because rather than just
doing an intersection of the document IDs,
we have to do this sort of two-level
algorithm where we both intersect
the document IDs and then also check that
there are compatible positions for
the words occurring in a phrase.
And so that means that we need to deal
with a bit more than just equalities.
So for
example if we're wanting to find instances
of the phrase information retrieval,
what we want is that if
the word information
occurs at position 37
in a certain document,
you want retrieval appearing at
position 38 in the document.
So going through that in
slightly more detail.
To process a phrase query, what we do is,
so let's assume our phrase is to be or
not to be that we want to
find in inverted commas.
So we get the postings list of
each of the individual terms and
then what we're going to do is we're
going to progressively intersect them.
So if we start of with the to be,
we're going to start at
the beginning doing postings merge.
And we're saying, well,
document 1 can't be a candidate because it
doesn't appear on the other postings list.
Document 2 can't be a candidate because it
And then at this point,
we've got to document 4.
And the doc IDs match.
But then that this point, with the
positional query, we have to recurse, and
then do another merge algorithm for
the positions within the postings list.
So we start here and here, but this time,
rather than a quality check what we're
wanting to see is can we find a place
where be occurs with a token
number one larger than two.
So we'll again step along.
And we'll say well here's one candidate,
190 and 191.
And here's a second candidate 429 and 430.
So those will be two candidate
matches inside document 4, and so
we'll be returning both of those candidate
matches separately, because we're actually
finding the positions in documents
where our phrase query is matching and
that we'll need to refine with
the other query words coming up ahead.
At that point we then revert back.
Wait, no, sorry, I'm wrong,
there's one more candidate.
Sorry, they're three candidates here,
right?
But once we've exhausted the positions
in one document, we then revert up to
the higher level of our postings merge,
and then we say five is less than seven.
So, this gets crossed off, and then we
advance that pointer and proceed along.
And I hope you can see that actually
this method works not only for
phrase queries where
the words are offset by one,
but you'd actually use exactly the same
method for the proximity queries
that we saw early with the Westlaw
servers where you could ask for
one word being within three words of
another word, or something like that.
All right, so
that was the examples like this.
So here we had limit within three words
of statute which is within three words
of federal, within two words of tort.
So, we could use the same kind of
techniques of optimizing the query.
That if we started with this one,
we are then having a condition
on how close together
the token position indexes have to be
to count as a match within a document.
And so clearly positional indexes can be
used for these kind of proximity queries,
where biword indexes do nothing for you.
So I've sort of set the algorithm here,
but it's something that
you might want to work through very
concretely is how you can change
the linear postings merge algorithms
to handle proximity queries.
In particular you can think about how
to get it to work for any value of k.
It's actually a little bit tricky to
do this correctly and efficiently.
Because you can have the within k words
matching on either side of the word and
you have to keep track of things for
the right number of words on each side.
It'd be good to try and
work out by yourself, but
you can also see one example of an answer
in the figure 2.12 about Introduction
to Information Retrieval book which you
can find free on the web to look at.
So positional index is great because it
allows us to answer phrase queries and
proximity queries.
But there's a cost to a positional index,
which is that our postings
list just got a lot larger.
Because rather than only
storing document IDs,
they're storing document IDs and
the offsets of tokens within the document.
And that's a major factor,
even though indices can be compressed.
Nevertheless, it's now completely standard
to use a positional index because of
the power and flexibility you can get from
handling phrase and proximity queries.
Whether they're being used explicitly
in terms of having these kind of phrase
queries or within three queries, or
whether they're just being exploited
to improve the ranking of a system when
it's looking for implicit phrases.
But as I said,
the positional index gets much larger.
And so when we're estimating the size of
a positional index, we note that there
has to be an entry for each occurrence
of a word, not just once a document.
So what that means is that
the size of the index
depends on the average
length of the documents now.
So, if we have fairly short documents.
It's not such a big deal,
because actually most of the words
that occur in a document
occur only once or twice.
But if we have very long documents,
then that blows out the size of
the positional index rather more.
So for example, you can consider a word
with a common word frequency 0.1%.
So this word occurs one word
in a thousand on average.
And so well if you have a document
size of average length 1000 then we
kind of gain no blow out really from
going to a positional index because
there will only be one
position being recorded.
But if we have documents
that are really long,
then we might be getting 100 times blow
out in the size of the positional index.
So everything depends, but just to give
you some very rough rules of thumb for
what is in some sense typical
documents like web pages,
that you might expect a positional
index to be somewhere around two to
four time as large as
a non-positional index.
And in particular, the size of
a positional index remains smaller than,
but starts to approach the volume
of the size of the original text.
So heading toward the third or
half the original size of the text that's
being indexed, which is much larger
than in the case of a non-positional
index where it might be down
to something like just 10%.
So having an IR system doesn't
actually take a lot more space than
storing the text in the first place.
I mentioned, when I mentioned biword
indices, that they aren't a useless idea,
even though they're not normally
the solution by themselves.
And so let me just come back to that.
These two approaches can be
very profitably combined.
So if you look at the query stream of high
query volume services
like web search engines,
there tend to be some queries that keep
on turning up again and again and again.
So things like person
names of popular people.
Well if we just treat those as just
regular postings list intersection or
the positional phrase query
posting list intersection,
what we'd have to do is keep on
doing this intersection over and
over again, every time that
someone sends that question.
And it's bad for
cases like Michael Jackson.
It's less bad when you've got
rare names like Britney Spears,
because presumably their
posting lists are much shorter,
and the intersection is roughly the same
as each individual postings list.
Doing this intersection every time is
especially bad when you have common words,
like if you're searching for
the band The Who.
Then what's going to
happen is you're going to
retrieve two enormous postings lists,
do the intersection of them,
then end up with a very short postings
list that this phrase queried.
So in a paper from a group in Melbourne
that's a well known information retrieval
group in 2004, they investigated a more
sophisticated mixed indexing system.
So in this, what happened was that for
common phrases like these examples,
they did build biwords and
index the biwords, where for rarer phrases
they were done by a positional index.
And so what they're able to show was
with a typical web query mixture,
you could execute it in one quarter of
the time of the positional index alone
by making use of also having
indexed some biwords.
But at the cost of only taking 26% more
space than having the positional index
alone.
So that makes it look
a fairly appealing tradeoff
to augment the positional
index with common bigrams.
And while one model of doing
that is to do it as here,
where you'll work out in
advance the common bigrams and
then index those in your
standard inverted index.
In practice what happens
a lot in modern systems is
that people try to do this
a bit more dynamically, so
that they keep a cache of commonly
being queried phrase queries.
And what the result of the postings
list intersection is for each of those.
And so that's like having added those
biwords to the inverted index but
done a bit more dynamically.
Okay, so that's introduced what's
the most useful extension to the classic
Boolean retrieval model, which is
having support for phrase queries.
And we introduced a method for
handling those, or
two methods, but in particular,
we looked at positional indices,
which can handle phrase queries but also
the proximity queries that we saw earlier.